He said, take this plane and fly it straight back to
Brooks.
And I said, well, I've never flown a plane. He says,
well, you won't learn any sooner. No instructions
at all. And so he says, get that wing and that
horizon. And I kept climbing a little bit, or I'd be
going down. I couldn't hold that thing. He says,
who in there blankety-blank ever told you you
would fly? And after a while, he took over when we
got pretty close to Brooks. And he throttled the
motor, of course, going down the land. And
we were going over past this tower.
And I saw some of them later. And Bob Williams, who
later became a major general, he says, Oh, didn't
Breen, did you draw Breen as an indirect? I said, I
sure did. And I got chewed out this morning. He
said, I heard every word you said. When you're
coming over that, coming over this barracks and
come down, he said, I happened to be in. And I had
heard every word he told you. And everybody else,
because he had that deep voice, you know, and he
always cussed. Well, uh...
They called me down for physical right after that.
And I went in there, and Captain Hart, who was a
medical examiner, he had been to a special course
on the heart at Harvard University, a refresher
course.
He caught three of us, one student from Vanderbilt
and the other one from Georgia Tech and myself. I
was the only Texas, there were 12 of us from Texas
down there on active duty. We were second
lieutenants.
And all three of us, and they gave us another
chance. Caught three of you what? With a bad heart.
Oh, with a bad heart. Irregular heart. So he says,
now, Captain Hart says, come back. And he says,
asked me, he said, you been hedgehogged? Have you
been on a flight this morning? I said, I sure have.
And he says, who's your instructor? I told him, he
said, well, you come back for another physical.
I'll give you a break. And he gave me an apartment.
And I went back again, and same one. He says, I've
had irregular heart evidence all my life. And I
went, my uncle checked me after I got home. And he
says, I can't find the thing wrong. And I'm. So they
discharged you? Oh, yeah. I got a discharge. So
they got a medical discharge then from active duty
in the Army. Yeah, they wanted me to transfer to the
quartermaster. But I had made up my mind if I was
going to take this active duty, and then I was
coming back to A&M the following semester, the
following year. And when they wanted to transfer
me to the quartermaster, I said I'd prefer not. So I
got out. And then you went back to A&M. I came back,
and I've been here ever since. And you decided then
that you wanted to go into vet school? Yes. I'd made
up my mind. I'd had two courses, one under Dr.
Francis. As an undergraduate? In anatomy, oh yes,
in veterinary medicine. And then,
and a course under Dr. Ornstein and Dr. Leonard as a
senior.
made up my mind, I'd like to try it. Did you ever,
even though you had made up your mind that you
wanted to become a vet, did you ever think of going
to some other vet school?
No, not at the time, because this probably was the
cheapest school. Oh, sure. And another thing, I
was a great admirer of Dr. Francis. Well, we're
going to talk about him in a minute, and so I want to
ask you another question. And that concerns the
screening process for your entrance into vet
school. Can you tell me how that worked at the time?
They didn't screen you. When you applied. All you
needed back in those days was, I think, 17 credits
or something like that from high school to enter as
a freshman in veterinary medicine.
I had this degree and I didn't have any screening
process like I have now. Yeah. So they were quite
happy to have you as a student. Well, they didn't
have. I think there were— Sure, there were so few.
In the class of—I finished in January of 26. I was
the only one at that time. Then they had, I think,
three to finish in May in 26. Jaggie was one of them.
and J.D. Jones and Paul Bariski, the three
graduates in 26. That is in May. And I took most of my
work, however, with the class of 25, and then left
off, of course, in clinic so I could come back, and I
asked Dr. Marstittle if I could do it, and they said
sure. So I left that one course to take, say, and
take an extra semester. But I worked at the
veterinary hospital. I lived down there and had
lived down there since 24.
Well, did they help you, fund you somehow? Did they
give you sort of a work-study situation, or how did
you support yourself? Well, I was getting 25 cents
an hour like everybody else. I finally got up to, I
think by the time I finished in January of 26, I was
getting 31 cents an hour. That was pretty good. The
blacks and the others, the laborers, and they
usually had six or eight or ten of them, they were
getting 33 cents an hour. The one, the Negro who
took the part. And they were doing construction
around? No, taking care of the dogs or the horses
and the cattle and the hogs. Hauling mess haul
garbage. They usually had several hundred hogs
they would feed with mess haul garbage. And ship
them off to a market. I remember a number of cases. I
was at the hospital with Dr. Marsteller, who was
dean at that time. No, he wasn't dean. Dr. Francis
was the dean, but he was next in line. He was head of
medicine and surgery. He'd wake us up about 5, 30 in
the morning. Says, let's go on. Let's get going.
Said, we're going to load those hogs this morning.
And usually I'd have noticed the night before, but
the day before. But we drove hogs from the old
hospital right across from where the AG building,
the old AG building is now.
That old hospital, of course, was torn down in
1933. And then the
barns over here extended out where all they play
polo and that around that area now.
But we drive them from that hospital up by where it
is, the old chemistry building, where the
archives building is now, the old Cushing
Library, right by the academic building. Between
that and the physics building and the civil
engineering, old civil engineering building at
least. I don't know what they have there now,
history, I think. and then by Goodwin Hall, and I
hope the Koch Building was not there, but right
across there, and just get there a little after
daybreak, and of course, pardon me, just before
Reveille. And you could hear the boys. We had one
old Tom Hill,
would take a sack of corn and lead them, and they'd
follow him. He'd be throwing corn on the way.
But those hogs, of course, they were fat hogs. They
would grunt, and the boys would start calling,
suey, suey, right from Goodwin Hall and from
Foster Hall. But... course I don't think
anybody's living around the Y and I am not sure
whether they had, I don't believe they had that
tenth cent in it anymore. I don't know where the low
end per year were in at the time, I don't think so.
But we'd drive them down to the Missouri Pacific
right across the drill field, parade ground now,
down by where the Across Wellborn Road there? Yes,
right across that and load them right at the
Missouri Pacific Station. I'd have a car there and
we'd load them. But I remember doing that several
times. And that's the kind of work that you would do
for your 25 cents an hour? Well, take care of clinic
horses and cattle, any dogs, anything else they
had. But it was a wonderful experience. Yeah, I
would think. I think it would be excellent. Where
did you live? I was there in the hospital right next
to the dog ward. Really? Yes. Did you get much
sleep? Well, you learn to do with it. Did they put
most of the vet students up? No, I was the only one
down there. Well, we had one boy, Harvey Ellis,
lived in the other part further away. But I was
right next to the dog ward and next to the, the Dr.
Marsteller's office, Dr. Leonard's office, at
the entrance. And every night that owl would come
through here about 12, 20, but before you could
ever hear the whistle, it would be down around
Weldon. The dogs would start howling. You usually
have one dog to lead them. And they'd start
howling. Well, you didn't know the owl was coming.
Another time, 1.30, well, I had probably asleep by
then. And then the morning trains, they'd howl. Of
course, that's at high note before a person could
hear them. They could detect it. And they'd all
howl.
So you always knew if the trains were on time. No,
they didn't wake me up once I got to sleep. Not after
that. I got used to it. You got used to it? Oh, yeah.
You slept right through that? Yeah. What did you
think of your student colleagues in the vet
school? I know there were only a few of them, but
what do you think their quality was, or compare
them to more recent students? Well, some of them
did some, made very good citizens and did good jobs
when they got out. I don't know. One boy dropped out
as a junior. I don't know what ever happened to
Robbins. But the rest of them stayed with
veterinary medicine in one form or another. And a
couple in that class of 25 became quite wealthy,
one from real estate and the other one from
organizing this company at peanutizing company
at Fort Worth that Bill Anderson bought it from his
widow. But he used to, that boy used to work at the
horse barn. He was a poor boy, but he became a
millionaire out of that thing. And so financially
wise, those two boys out of that class of 25 perhaps
have been very successful, of course.
Winchester from Texarkana
said there were three millionaires in that class
of 25, and two of them were vet students. And, but I
think he bought the land right there in the age of
Texarkana. And because
I know that McDonald's was trying to buy some land
from him. He wouldn't sell to them. He didn't know.
But I don't know what happened. Were they pretty
good students? Yes, they were pretty good
students. Did you detect any change over the years
of the quality of the students?
Oh, after we got to screening them, and the first
class that was screened was the class of 50, 1950.
In fact, when they made, see, we had about a
quadruple increase about 1932. In fact, we had
only one student in 30, that was Ty Hardy. And two
students in 28, and I think three in 27, and
four in 20. Let's see, in 22, 21, there were four or
five. And 23, there were two. 22, there were two.
And
there, several years, only one would graduate.
But in 32, the student enrollment jumped about
four times many, and then in 38, it jumped again. So
they made a ruling in about 40, at 39 or 40, that the
enrollment would be limited to 100 students. And
then in 45 or 46, I'm not positive about the exact
time. Anyway, they made a ruling that each class
would be screened according to scholarship and
aptitude. Those were the two qualities they were
putting on there. So that made the class of 50 the
first one that had been screened. And the quality
was pretty good. But grade point-wise,
I often think these high schools change their
grading, and some of them from schools that are
more lenient than others. I remember a boy came
here with a straight A average, and he didn't get
the first base here. I never got into the sophomore
year. But I think that was aptitude. That was
before they started screening them. So
his brother,
no, his father was a veterinarian. And so he was
sent. It was mandatory. And he just wasn't
beginning to take to it. No, he wasn't. I didn't
understand. He was out of pocket. So, but these
students nowadays, their grade point ratio is
pretty high. They had some masters and PhDs even
have come through. In fact, I've had several PhDs
that came through.
One happened to be a memorizer. In fact, I went back
and studied his history at the lowest grade. grade
in the class.
I'd forgotten how many we had that year, about 60,
and he had the lowest. He made, he was the only one
below 70, and he made a grade of 58, I think. And I
couldn't understand it. And he came around and
asked me to give him part of something to study. I
says, look, a man with a PhD, don't you ask me how to
study. I said, you'd better go somewhere else. I
said, I can't give you any leads. I said, I can tell
you this, you're a memorizer. And I said, you can't
see the forest for the trees. And I said, get with
somebody who takes notes and can pay attention. I
don't know whether he was paying attention. I
think he was glorying in that he'd just received
his PhD. But he took it in taxonomy. I found and
later checked on him, and some of them said, he got
it on taxonomy, which is rote memory. I said, well,
that explains it. I said, when it comes to thought
questions, he can't do it. I said, they'll find him
out in clinic. And he was found out in clinic. He
made C's. And everybody else was making B's and
A's. But that was an exception. That just stands
out like a sore thumb to me. But just to show you the
quality, I think he was a crybaby. And
I had been warned by others who taught him as a
freshman, sophomore that he's been crying on your
shoulder for a grade or something. And he had to
work like everything to get a C with me. And he was
trying to talk me out of a beat. I said, no way. I
said, you're a C student. And I said, your record
shows that you've never made higher than a C. And I
said, you surely haven't done better than a C with
me. But I warned another student, one of the girls
who came to me, about him being so good that I'd been
studying with him. I said, well, get away from him.
I said, he's the only class, he's like the lowest
grade in class. I said, do your own thinking. And I
said, you're a memorizer too. And I said,
I'm going to start asking questions
that are not out of the book. Thought questions for
you people. I said, I'm going to change my type of
attack. And So they started making lower grades.
But they finally worked out. They were two in the
same class. But in general, what would you say is
the quality of the students? Very good. In fact, I
had lots of As. And I wasn't known to give an A or many
As. But I had quite a few of them. And
I remember one class in the 40s.
before we started screening them,
that we had too many for one section. I had around
90, I think, 80 or 90. And I said, well, we're going
to divide it into two sections in lecture. And I
couldn't get them. There were a bunch of students
that wouldn't fit. What do you mean they wouldn't
fit? Nine, they wouldn't fit the schedule. Oh. And
if I had just put two and two together, they were
flunkies, and they
had such an irregular schedule, there were nine of
them.
And I had,
or eight. Every one but one had an F at the end of the
semester. Hold on. No, I had seven F's and two D's or
C's. I forgot what a passing grade was then. So it
bothered me, and we always had a correlation
between physiology, my courses, and the
chemistry and the biology. So I went to Dr.
Haddish. He said, don't bother. He said, when we
get classes in here, the majority of them flunk.
Well, that was true in freshman chemistry. And we
took those same students and found out that all
nine of them flunked chemistry. And I went to the
biology. All nine of them flunked biology. I said,
well, I'm a softy. I said, I passed two of
them. The other two, and believe it or not, in the
largest of the three sections, there were a bunch
of buddies in there and they all got together. All
the A's were in that section, in the largest. And I
had a bunch of A's.
So I learned a lot about teaching. These boys,
these nine students, were about two weeks behind
the other two sections when we got through. I just
had to skim through part of it. No wonder. I let them
set their own pace. In this large section, they
were going higher than the second, but I learned
better. Tell
me about how difficult you thought the course work
was in 1923 and 24. Well, I think for one thing they
let us take too much work, sign up too many hours.
And I think that gave rise to the limiting the
number of hours that they could take. In the 30s, we
did that in the 30s.
I mean, you could take any, back in the 20s, you
could take as many hours as you wanted. Dr.
Francis, who was a dean, he says, you do a whole lot
better work if you're busy. So you want any more
courses on that? I'll just give you more. That's
what he said. That was his attitude. So as a result,
why, some of us overloaded. I would think so. But I
learned, man. less than the hard way.
But when they started limiting the number of
hours, I don't recall what year, that was in the
late 20s or early 30s, they did that. But that
helped a lot. Did you find the coursework very
difficult, or do you think it's increased
difficulty over the years? It should be more
difficult now because the student now has so much
more to learn. And with all the research, it's far
better now. Of course, as we got larger and larger,
the students got less contact with the clinical
animals, but they have a very efficient way of
handling clinic now. It's much better, the
curriculum is much better than it was back in those
days. In what way is it more, is it better? Well,
working in small groups in these clinic groups of
six or eight students or something like that, and
back in, oh, in the middle 30s or 40s where you'd
have large groups, and they didn't have it
organized as well as they do now. Of course,
we didn't have satisfactory textbooks for most
courses. We had a good one in physiology, and we
didn't have a good one in pharmacology. We had
nothing in toxicology. So we had to more or less
make our own notes, lecture notes, out of
journals. And some of the other books, some
foreign books and lab manuals, were practically
unknown and so we had to more or less write our own
lab instructions.
But we all learned from it, managed it somehow. I
was wondering about when you were a student in the
mid-1920s, who were your favorite instructors?
Well some in animal husbandry and later in
veterinary medicine, but some of them out. I would
say Dr. Silvey, head of the physics department,
was one of my favorites. Dr. Bilsing, head of
entomology, was one of my favorites. Mr. Stangle,
W.L. Stangle, we called him Runt. He was later dean
head of Allen Vesbury and Dean at Texas Tech.
Mr. George Templeton, who was head of the
department for several years, left here and went
to Mississippi. And then Dr. Francis in
veterinary medicine was one of the greatest
probably the greatest man I've ever known. In
fact, that's one reason I came back here, to teach.
I wanted to take three years of graduate work with
him, or teach.
But
I worked with him and under him for 10 years before
he died in 36. Well, let's talk about Dr. Mark
Francis now. Tell me about your relationship with
him. Well,
he was the dean and head of anatomy. When I came here
in 26, there were six teachers, and I think there
were four wives, Mrs. Francis, Mrs. Marstella,
Mrs. Leonard and Mrs. Wharton. Wharton was in
pathology. But there were six of us teaching,
three of them in veterinary medicine surgery, one
in pathology, one in anatomy,
and one in physiology.
And now They have over 100 teaching staff
and about 150 or more in the classified personnel,
that is technicians. We didn't have a single
technician in the 20s. One telephone, one
stenographer or secretary She was at the dean's
office in the mornings and then with the veteran of
medicine and surgery in the afternoons. And if I
had to write a letter, well, I had to get it in the
morning or either write it that day or that evening
and then have it at her desk in the morning so she
could type it. And
no technicians.
But we had one